# About his documentation files

This is file `CONTRIBUTING.md`.

`CONTRIBUTING.md` contains guidance on how to participate in the
development of the `leastsqtobayes` project, which is intended to use
Gnuplot's least-squares fitting capability to fit a user-supplied
function, with some adjustable parameters (a list of which is also
supplied by the user), to a (once more user-supplied) data set, use
the results for Bayesian parameter estimation and model comparison
using the leading-order Laplace's method approximations to posterior
expectations and standard errors in \citet{Lindley:1980:ABM} and the
leading-order Laplace's method approximation to the marginal
likelihood set out in \citet{Kass:1992:ABF} and \citet{Kass:1995:BF}.

`CONTRIBUTING.md` was written by Dr. Daniel C. Hatton

Copyright (C) 2022 Dr. Daniel C. Hatton

This program, including this documentation file, is free software: you
can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation:
version 3 of the License.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License, and the GNU General Public License
which it incorporates, for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License [in file LICENSE] along with this program.  If not, see
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

# Contact

Daniel Hatton can be contacted on <dan.hatton@physics.org>

# Guidance on participation

Collaborators in the development of the `leastsqtobayes` project are
always welcome.  I (DCH) sometimes place suggestions for development
in the Github "issues" system at
<https://github.com/danielhatton/leastsqtobayes/issues>.  However, I
don't intend what I place in that system to impose restrictions: I'm
also happy to entertain other contributions, proposed either via the
issues system or by e-mail to <dan.hatton@physics.org>.

As always with open-source projects, contributions are especially
valued if they come with a patch to the code, implementing the bug
fixes or improvements that they propose.  If you do submit a patch,
please:
- state clearly who owns the copyright in the patch you're submitting;
- if you personally don't own the copyright (for example if you
  operate under a contract of employment that assigns the copyright in
  any code you write to your employer), then provide a brief summary
  of the procedure by which the actual copyright-holder has authorized
  you to submit the patch;
- state the licence terms under which you are making the patch
  available (the package as a whole is under version 3 of the GPL, and
  using this licence would be particularly helpful).

Finally: thank you in advance to all contributors.
